Initial commit for Error Budget Policy ADR-00007 (#23)
operate-first/SRE: ADRs/RH/SIG-SRE/ADR-00007-Error-Budget-Policy.md

# Aim

There are many inputs which affect the prioritization of work. The reliability of a service is a significant, but not the only, input to this process. The Error Budget is the primary metric that is used to inform the decision makers of issues that affect the reliability of a service, and by inference, the satisfaction of the customer with that service.

The questions that this is aiming to help answer is:

* "What do we need to do now that the error budget is all gone?"
* "How do we detect the early signs of system degradation, and what automated mechanisms do we have in place to intercept them?"

# Scope

The scope of this policy is limited to: \<service\>.

The SLOs for this \<service\> are defined \<here\> (link to SLO definitions document).

# Out-of-Scope

The scope of this policy does not apply to: \<service/aspect-of-service\>.

# Current Status

The SLOs for this service are tracked via \<this\> dashboard (link to dashboard or visualization of SLOs).

# Decision Making Principles

## Short-term

* If the service has any remaining error budget for each SLO, releases (feature work) can proceed.

> * If the service has consumed all the error budget for at least one SLO, all releases will stop except for security fixes and the work needed to recover from the "SLO miss" state (reliability work).

Reviewer: I think that could be changed to "overused" or "consumed more than the allowed error budget".
The rationale is that teams may want to explicitly burn remaining error budget before it "expires" by e.g. running chaos tests or other experiments.

Author: Great idea thanks @pilhuhn . I have made that change.

Reviewer: Not sure I see it. Do you mean the "at the discretion .." part below? It would not be clear from this to me.

Author: Hey @pilhuhn . I changed the text to (commit [here](https://github.com/operate-first/sre/pull/23/commits/76955c2a88ec7c1d2c83a40c6935088ed6fad0a5)):

_If the service has consumed **more than** the **allowed** error budget for at least one SLO, all releases will stop except for security fixes and the work needed to recover from the "SLO miss" state (reliability work)._

Does that work for you?

# ADR-00007 Error Budget Policy

Authors: Craig Robinson

## Status

Draft

## Problem Statement

A fundamential tenet of Site Reliability Engineering is to maximise customer satisfaction, not only through the function that a service provides, but also through its stability (aka reliability). This stability is measured through an SLO.

> This "SLO miss" is most often described referred to as the "error budget". The error budget can be described as the amount of "error" that a system can withstand without having a negative effect on the service, most notably, the customers "experience" of the service. Mathmatically, it is often described as the inverse of the SLO: that is, as an example, there is an SLO target of 99.9% (3 nines) then the error budget is 0.1%. It can also be referred to as a measure of time (e.g. the error budget is 4 minutes per month).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This "SLO miss" is most often described referred to as the "error budget". The error budget can be described as the amount of "error" that a system can withstand without having a negative effect on the service, most notably, the customers "experience" of the service. Mathematically, it is often described as the inverse of the SLO: that is, as an example, there is an SLO target of 99.9% (3 nines) then the error budget is 0.1%. It can also be referred to as a measure of time (e.g. the error budget is 4 minutes per month).
```

Author: Fixed

For an SLO to be effective, it needs to have consequences. That is:

"What happens when we consume all our error budget?"

In many organisations, this question is often answered through the existence of a document, backed by a process, that can be called an "Error Budget Policy".

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we could also add here that error budgets could be used not only for measuring the service's health but also used for maintenance work? (Like scheduled downtime during upgrade if that is needed or system failure during stress test).

Author: Thanks @Gaikanomer9 . Do you have an example of how it can be used in that way?

Reviewer 3: Hey @brizrobbo ! Sure, I'm thinking of the following example:

Error budget policy also covers running scheduled stress/performance tests on the system. For example, performance tests, scheduled for preparation to workload peaks, should be  broken down into several phases. Each next phase should have a higher load than the previous. If during on the phases the system breaks down and the production SLO is affected, the downtime should be reflected in a consumption of a defined error budget. If the error budget is exhausted, all tests should be postponed till the next window.

Author: Thanks @Gaikanomer9 .

That's a good point to consider. I have not added it in this introduction section, but I have added the following dot point to the "Short-term" section below to cover off this case where: there is still some remaining error budget, but it is at "risk" due to some scheduled "risky" work.

(see this [commit](https://github.com/operate-first/sre/pull/23/commits/4881226d04a8ca8e95a890a3ecf91072c1ba6e71))

* If the service has any remaining error budget for each SLO, but some anticipated "risky" work is scheduled (e.g. load tests) which may rapidly consume the remaining budget, then a risk assessment needs to be done, and a decision made as to whether this work should continue or not and/or feature work needs to be stopped.

I didn't change the table to reflect this permutation, as I think that would make it too complicated and this above statement is probably sufficient.

Thoughts?

## Non-goals

* This ADR does not aim at providing a definitive policy. The intention would be that consumers of this document would be able to take this example, based on the lessons learned from SRE teams already experienced in the running of services, and mold it to their own experience. It is purposefully generalised.

## Current Architecture

* An analysis of a number of existing Error Budget Policies was conducted, identifying the commonalities and the differences. The best practices articulated in this document was a synthesis of these sources.

## Proposed Architecture

The proposed content is as follows:

***

# Error Budget Policy (draft)

Service Name: &lt;Service/s Name&gt;

# Service

&lt;Briefly describe the service/s under the scope of this document.&gt;

# Definitions

* _SLI_: The Service Level Indicator is the carefully-considered measure for an aspect of the service that is considered necessary to its function (e.g. the login screen should be available).
* _SLO_: The Service Level Objective is the desired target for the aspect measured by an SLI (e.g. the login screen should be available for 99% of the time).

> * _Error Budget_:  The Error budget is one of the fundamental metrics for service reliability. It is the measure of how much a service can be unreliable (e.g. fail) without impacting customers. Error budgets are always based on SLOs.

Reviewer 2: It's not that unreliability within the SLO doesn't impact customers _at all_. It might, but that's deemed acceptable (to the service owner, but also to customers since they've accepted the SLA).

Author: Thanks @tombentley . Do you think that needs to be reflected in the text...or it is sufficient (in a general sense) as it stands currently?

> * _SLO miss_: The state where the error budget has been consumed, and the service is not operating "as expected". 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* _SLO miss_: The state where the error budget has been consumed, and the level of service is not acceptable to the service owner.
```

Author: Awesome. Changed as suggested.

* _Reliability Work_: The work that is needed to recover the service from an "SLO miss" state.
* _Feature Work_: The work that is done to provide the features and functionality that is needed by that service.

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we could also add here definition for burn rate? This could be important for talking about error budgets and discussing SLOs:

* _Burn rate_: The speed you are consuming your error budget. For example, consuming 100% of the error budget in the expected period (for 30 days period - 30 days), consuming 200% of the error budget in the expected period (for 30 days period - 15 days). This should be used for SLO-based alerting.

Author: Great idea @Gaikanomer9 . I will add in the next commit.

Author: Added.

# Aim

There are many inputs which affect the prioritization of work. The reliability of a service is a significant, but not the only, input to this process. The Error Budget is the primary metric that is used to inform the decision makers of issues that affect the reliability of a service, and by inference, the satisfaction of the customer with that service.

 The question it is aiming to help answer is:

"What do we need to do now that the error budget is all gone?"

> 

Reviewer 3: I would also see the aim of an error budget policy as a way to detect SLO miss early by introducing Multiple Burn Rate Alerts. In this case, we would need to answer also the following question: "How do we detect the initial signs of system degradation, and what **automated** mechanisms do we have in place for an interception?"

Author: I have added this (slightly modified) version in the next commit:

The questions that this is aiming to help answer is:

* "What do we need to do now that the error budget is all gone?"
* "How do we detect the early signs of system degradation, and what automated mechanisms do we have in place to intercept them?"

# Scope

> The scope of this policy is limited to: &lt;service&gt;.

Reviewer 2: HTML entities are ugly. You should be able to use `\<service\>`, which is slightly nicer.

Author: Replaced. Thanks.

The SLOs for this &lt;service&gt; are defined &lt;here&gt; (link to SLO definitions document).

# Out-of-Scope

> The scope of this policy does not apply to: &lt;service/You are an AMAZING manager! aspect-of-service&gt;.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scope of this policy does not apply to: &lt;service/aspect-of-service&gt;.
```

I'm guessing that was a mistake. If not then I don't understand.

Author: LoL. Yes, a mistake. Fixed.

# Current Status

The SLOs for this service are tracked via &lt;this&gt; dashboard (link to dashboard or visualization of SLOs).

# Decision Making Principles

## Short-term

* If the service has any remaining error budget for each SLO, releases (feature work) can proceed.
* If the service has consumed all the error budget for at least one SLO, all releases will stop except for security fixes and the work needed to recover from the "SLO miss" state (reliability work).

>     * However, if the error budget was consumed by miscategorised errors (false positives) and no customers were impacted, releases may continue. A bug for the miscategorisation must be prioritized and fixed as soon as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * However, if the error budget was consumed by miscategorised errors (false positives, e.g. due to imperfect SLI implementation) and no customers were impacted, releases may continue. A bug for the miscategorisation must be prioritized and fixed as soon as possible.
```

Author: Suggestion added.

>     * As the error budget is only one of the inputs, an exception process is available to enable the continuation of feature work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * As the error budget is only one of the inputs, an exception process is available to enable the continuation of feature work at the discretion of the service owner (business)
```

Author: Suggestion added.

   <td>Low</td>
   <td>If there is no SLO reflecting customer dissatisfaction, create it if appropriate.<p>If an SLO exists, then review based on customer feedback.<p>Fix the Service if needed.</td>
   <td>Focus on "reliability work" to resolve the customer satisfaction problem.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Not Met</td>
   <td>High</td>
   <td>Low</td>
   <td>Offload toil and fix product and/or improve automated fault mitigation.</td>
   <td>Stop "feature work" and focus on "reliability work" to resolve the customer satisfaction problem.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

# Review Cadence

It is absolutely necessary to setup a cadence for a regular review of the state of the error budget consumption at any point in time. The following is an example of what would be considered the minimum viable cadence required to keep on top of "burning" error budget. These meetings are an essential part of the "Iteration" phase as described in the [SLO Lifecycle ADR](https://github.com/operate-first/sre/pull/13). The reviews refer to these [personas](https://github.com/operate-first/sre/blob/main/ADRs/RH/SIG-SRE/ADR-00002%20Personas%20related%20to%20Managed%20Services.md).

## Weekly Team Uptime Review

> The team/s (SRE/Engineering) responsible for the services need to collaboratively review the availability of the services on a regular basis. As per many typical engineering processes that have been well establish, this can, and should, include regular sprint reviews (standups) and retrospectives. However, it has proven very beneficial to have a regular (e.g. weekly) review between, at least, SRE and engineering (but also possibly including the Product Owner). SRE, for example, are typically those who first identify that the error budget has been consumed, or is being consumed. At this meeting, they have the opportunity to inform the engineering team. If the error budget consumption coincides with an incident, this is often in the form of an RCA (Root Cause Analysis) document. The engineering team receive this information, and in close collaboration with the Product Owner, they can prioritise the rectification of the issue/s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The team/s (SRE/Engineering) responsible for the services need to collaboratively review the availability of the services on a regular basis. As per many typical engineering processes that have been well established, this can, and should, include regular sprint reviews (standups) and retrospectives. However, it has proven very beneficial to have a regular (e.g. weekly) review between, at least, SRE and engineering (but also possibly including the Product Owner). SRE, for example, are typically those who first identify that the error budget has been consumed, or is being consumed. At this meeting, they have the opportunity to inform the engineering team. If the error budget consumption coincides with an incident, this is often in the form of an RCA (Root Cause Analysis) document. The engineering team receive this information, and in close collaboration with the Product Owner, they can prioritise the rectification of the issue/s.
```

Author: Fixed

Note: this regular weekly meeting does not replace the need for urgent action required in the case of a significant incident. It is expected that, at these times, ad-hoc review meetings can be called to expedite the resolution.

## Monthly Uptime Review

The weekly review meeting focuses on rapidly identifying issues to mitigate burning error budget as quickly as possible. However, as SLOs are often measured monthly, it is also beneficial to review the SLO performance on a monthly basis. The focus for this review is identifying trends over this longer time period. This is particularly useful in identifying SLOs that may need to be revised (for example, they are set to low or to high, or, they may be false alerts).

> # Escalation Process

Reviewer 3: The escalation process would definitely involve the writing of the Post Mortem which would include the action steps for prevention of such events in the future. Should we include some information about it here?

And for the escalation process, I would think the Incident Manager role should be described. This role would be the PoC for this incident and would gather On-Call SREs and all responsible parties.

Author: That is a very good point @Gaikanomer9 . Although, as that particular process is about "escalating" if an issue is identified during one of the aforementioned review meetings. I have re-worded to make that much clearer. Please tell me if that addresses this concern.

Reviewer 3: Awesome, that sounds much better! Thank you 👍
